default setting

This setting specifies the default value for a parameter or a user
function.

Parameters

If the type of the parameter is included in the parameter block, the
default setting specifies only the default value. In this case, it can
also be an expression that evaluates to the default value when the
formula is compiled. The expression can only use constant values,
including predefined symbols, but not including the values of other
parameters.

If the type of the parameter is not included in the parameter block, the
default setting is either a bool, int, float, or complex value and
specifies the type and the default value of the parameter. The type of
the parameter is set to the type of this setting. Therefore, you must be
careful when specifying the default value. Suppose you want a float
parameter with the default value 4. In this case you have to use the
value 4.0 instead of 4; otherwise the type of the parameter would be
int. If the default setting is not specified, the parameter is treated
as complex, with a default value of (0, 0).

For readability, it is recommended to explicitly specify the type of a
parameter before the parameter block.

Plug-in parameters

For plug-in parameters, the default setting is a class name that
specifies the default plug-in to use for this parameter. The default
plug-in should of course be derived from the parameter class. The class
name is looked up in the list of imported classes. If omitted, the
default plug-in is the same as the base class for the parameter.

User functions

The default setting is a function value and specifies the default value
of the user function. It is important to add parentheses () after the
function name. If this setting is not specified, the default value of
the user function is set to sin() for complex user functions, or
mergenormal() for color user functions.

General

This setting can only occur inside parameter blocks and function blocks.

Examples:

    default:
      param FloatParam1
        default = 3.0  ; type implicitly set to float
      endparam
      float param FloatParam2
        default = 3
      endparam
      complex param CenterParam
        default = #center + (2, 0)
      endparam
      color param ColorParam
        default = rgb(1, 0, 0)
      endparam
      complex func MyFunc1
        default = sqr()
      endfunc
      color func MyFunc2
        default = mergesoftlight()
      endfunc
      MyClass param MyClassParam
        default = MyDerivedClass
      endparam

See Also
enabled setting
visible setting
Parameters
