Exponential interpolation

For floating-point parameters, Ultra Fractal offers an additional
interpolation setting called exponential interpolation. This can be set
independently of the normal interpolation methods in the Timeline tool
window.

Exponential interpolation should be used for parameters that are
exponential in nature. This means that in order to experience the same
apparent increase of the parameter, you need to double it each time,
instead of adding something.

A perfect example is the Magnification parameter on the Location tab. It
starts at 1. If you add 1 to make it 2, the fractal is magnified by a
factor of two. If you add 1 again, the fractal is magnified by only a
factor of 1.5. If you keep adding 1, the apparent difference gets less
and less. At a magnification of 1000, you will probably not notice it if
you change the magnification to 1001. In contrast, if you keep
multiplying the magnification with two, you will each time experience
the same zoom effect. Clearly, the Magnification parameter is
exponential in nature. In contrast, the Rotation Angle parameter is
linear in nature.

This is important when interpolating animations, because exponential
parameters must also be interpolated exponentially. For example, if you
create an animation of 99 frames where Magnification ranges from 1 at
frame 1 to 16 at frame 99, it must be 4 at frame 50 to give the effect
of a gradually increasing zooming level. With normal interpolation, it
will be 8.5. Fortunately, the Magnification parameter uses exponential
interpolation by default.

[]

To turn exponential interpolation on and off for a parameter, open the
Timeline tool window, select the parameter in the tree view, and click
the Exponential interpolation check box.

Notes

- Certain built-in parameters in Ultra Fractal, such as Magnification,
  Stretch, and Color Density in the Inside and Outside tabs, are
  exponential by default. When you are writing a formula, you can also
  specify whether or not floating-point parameters in your formula
  should be treated as exponential by default. See the exponential
  setting.
- Due to the nature of exponential values, exponential interpolation
  only works if both the begin and end points are nonzero and both
  positive or negative.

See Also
Tutorial: Working with animations
Timeline
Interpolation
Animation
