Functions

As you write larger formulas, it becomes desirable to avoid code
duplication and to have a way to better structure the formula code. To
do this, you can group code in functions that you can call just like the
built-in functions.

Here is a complete Mandelbrot formula that shows how to declare and use
a function that calculates one iteration of the Mandelbrot set:

    MandelbrotWithFunction {
    init:
      complex func calculateMandelbrot(const complex x)
        return sqr(x) + #pixel
      endfunc

      z = 0
    loop:
      z = calculateMandelbrot(z)
    bailout:
      |z| < 4
    }

- Functions start with the func keyword and end with the endfunc
  keyword. (These keywords are also used for function blocks.)
- The return type of the function is specified before the func keyword.
  For a function with no return value, leave out the type before the
  func keyword.
- Arguments to the function are declared after the name of the function
  between parentheses. See Function arguments for more information.
- A function needs to return its value with the return keyword. The
  return keyword causes an immediate exit of the function with the
  specified return value. It is required in functions with a return
  value. In functions without a return value (also called void functions
  or procedures in other languages), you can use return to exit the
  function prematurely, but it is not required. See Function arguments
  for an example.
- Functions can declare local variables, but they can also access the
  variables from the formula in which they are declared.
- Functions declared in a formula can only be accessed by the formula
  itself. If you want to access a function from another formula, declare
  it as a static class method instead.
- Function declarations can occur anywhere in a formula where you can
  write "normal" formula code. The order in which functions are declared
  does not matter: it is legal to call a function that is declared later
  in the formula. A function can also call itself recursively.

Functions declared in a global section can write to global variables,
but you cannot call these from outside the global section, unless the
entire function is declared as const (in which case it can only read
from any variables):

    Test {
    global:
      float x

      float func getXSquared() const
        return x * x
      endfunc

    init:
      z = getXSquared()
      ...
    } 

Next: Function arguments

See Also
Built-in functions
Methods
