helpfile setting

This setting is a string value and specifies a help file containing help
on the formula. The help file can be accessed by clicking the More
button in the Layer Properties tool window, and then clicking Help.

This setting can be used in the default section of all types of
formulas.

The help file can be a Windows HTML Help file (*.chm), a Windows Help
file (*.hlp), a collection of HTML files (*.htm or *.html), an Adobe
Acrobat file (*.pdf), a Microsoft Word file (*.doc), or a plain text
file (*.txt). The file name specified can be absolute (specifying the
full path) or relative.

If the file name is a relative path, Ultra Fractal searches for the help
file in the folder where the formula is installed, and in the Help on
Formulas folder set in the Options dialog. The Help on Formulas folder
is the preferred location for installing help files for formulas.

With Windows HTML Help files, Ultra Fractal shows the topic specified by
the helptopic setting. This should be the path to the topic file within
the compiled help file. If the helptopic setting is not specified, the
default topic is shown.

With Windows Help files, Ultra Fractal also shows the topic specified by
the helptopic setting. If the helptopic setting is not specified, the
Contents topic in the help file will be shown (if no Contents topic
exists, this defaults to the first topic in the help file). The
helptopic setting should be equal to the topic identifier. It should not
be a mapped topic ID.

With HTML files, Ultra Fractal opens the specified HTML file using the
default browser (the browser associated with the .htm or .html
extension). If the helptopic setting is specified, it is used to jump to
a name identifier within the HTML file (name identifiers are specified
using the <A NAME="identifier"> tag).

Because a help system based on HTML usually needs many separate HTML
files and images, it is recommended to group these files into a separate
folder in the Help for Formulas folder. The name of this folder should
be equal to the formula file. The helpfile setting should then be
something like "MyFormulas\index.html".

Of course, you can also place your HTML help files on the Internet and
specify the location using the helpfile setting, such as
"http://www.myformulas.com/". In this case you must use the full URL,
with the http:// prefix.

With Adobe Acrobat, Microsoft Word, or plain text files, Ultra Fractal
opens the file with the associated application, such as Acrobat Viewer.
The helptopic setting is not used.

Examples:

    default:
      helpfile = "MyFormulas.chm"
      helpfile = "MyFormulas\index.html"
      helpfile = "MyFormulas.hlp"
      helpfile = "http://www.myformulas.com/"
      helpfile = "MyFormulas-Help.pdf"

See Also
helptopic setting
Providing help and hints
Writing transformations
Writing fractal formulas
Writing coloring algorithms
