Importing classes

When a formula or a class contains a class name, for example to declare
a variable or a plug-in parameter, Ultra Fractal searches for the class
in the list of imported files, and then in the current file. To import a
file so its classes become available, use the import keyword.

    class ExtendedBailout(Test.ufm:Bailout) {
    public:
      import "common.ulb"
      ; ...
    }

This modified version of the ExtendedBailout example first imports the
file Test.ufm because that is where its ancestor is located. Then it
imports the plug-in library file common.ulb.

- The import keyword expects a file name within double quotes, without
  any path information. The file is located using the current formula
  search paths as set in the Folder tab of the Options dialog.
- If a file name is specified in the ancestor specification of a class,
  this behaves as if this file was imported before any other files. The
  browser, however, needs the specification of the ancestor file name
  here to be able to check the inheritance of classes when selecting
  plug-in for a plug-in parameter.
- The order in which import statements occur is important. When
  searching for a class, Ultra Fractal searches the file that was last
  imported first, and so on. Other than that, import statements can
  occur anywhere in a formula or class. Even the statements before an
  import statement are affected by it, because import statements are
  read and applied before the rest of the code is checked for
  consistency and type compatibility. For readability, it is recommended
  to put your import statements at the top of a formula or class.
- Plug-in library files with the .ulb extension have two purposes. When
  looking for plug-ins for plug-in parameters, the browser will only
  look in .ulb files. So plug-ins must always be in a plug-in library
  file. Also, plug-in library files provide a logical place to put
  classes that are intended to be shared by different fractal formulas,
  coloring algorithms, and transformations.
- The common.ulb file that is installed with Ultra Fractal provides many
  useful base classes. See The common.ulb file.
- You can also import classes from .ufm, .ucl, or .uxf files if you have
  to, but this is recommended only for files that you control yourself.
  If you are a formula author and you want to provide common
  functionality to other authors, put them in your own .ulb file. Do not
  import a class from another author's .ufm/.ucl/.uxf file because it
  might be changed in a future revision of that file. See also
  Publishing your formulas.

Next: The common.ulb file

See Also
Classes
Inheritance
Plug-in parameters
