Memory management

Ultra Fractal manages the memory for all objects that are created
automatically, and normally you do not have to worry about this.
However, if you create a large number of objects, or if your objects are
large because they use large arrays, you might want to know how you can
influence memory usage during a calculation.

The lifetime of an object is managed with reference counting. As long as
there is a reference to an object, it will not be freed. If the last
reference to an object goes out of scope, if another object is stored to
the reference, or if it is set to 0, the object is freed immediately.

For debugging purposes, you can print the name and reference count of an
object. This example uses the Point example class:

    Point p = new Point(0, 0)
    print(p)       ; Prints Point (1)
    Point pt2 = p  ; Create a second reference
    print(p)       ; Prints Point (2)
    p = 0          ; Clears the first reference
    print(pt2)     ; Prints Point (1)
    pt2 = 0        ; Frees the Point object
    print(pt2)     ; Prints 0

As you can see, you can free an object by setting all reference that
point to it to 0, the null reference. You can use this to reclaim memory
during a calculation.

When using recursive data structures, you can easily get the situation
where two objects contain references to each other. In this case, the
reference count of both objects will never reach zero. To solve this,
Ultra Fractal keeps a running list of all live objects and will free
them once the entire calculation is finished. If you need to reclaim
memory earlier, you need to explicitly set the references to 0 so the
objects can be freed. You could say that Ultra Fractal uses
deterministic garbage collection, in contrast to environments like Java
or .NET which use nondeterministic garbage collection.

Again, normally you do not have to worry about this because the amount
of memory consumed by objects is usually very modest. But in case memory
usage becomes a problem, you can use this information to track down the
reference counts of objects and make sure they are freed when necessary.

Next: Writing transformations

See Also
Classes
Objects
