Objects

To use a class, you have to create instances of the class, which are
called objects. In Ultra Fractal, you always use a reference to the
object. Such an object reference can be stored in a variable with the
class name as type.

Let's create some objects using the example Point class given in
Classes:

    ; Declare a new object variable
    Point p
    ; Create a new Point object and store it in p.
    p = new Point(3, 4)
    float d = p.distance(new Point(0, 0))  ; Returns 5

The new operator takes the name of the class as a function, together
with the arguments for the constructor. It creates a new instance of the
Point class and returns a reference to it.

When you copy an object variable, you only copy the reference to the
object, not the object itself. Copying an object variable therefore does
not create a new object. Example:

    Point pt1 = new Point(3, 4)
    Point pt2 = pt1 ; This copies a reference!
    pt2.x = 10      ; Now pt1.x is also 10
    print(pt1.x)    ; This will print 10
    pt2 = new Point(pt1.x, pt1.y) ; Creates a true copy
    pt2.x = 6       ; Only modifies the copy
    print(pt1.x)    ; This still prints 10
    print(pt2.x)    ; This prints 6

You can also set an object variable to the special value 0, the null
reference. This clears the reference, so it points to no object at all.
This is often useful when programming, for example when building a
linked list. You can test if an object value is empty by comparing with
0, or by treating it as a boolean expression:

    Point p = 0
    if p != 0
      ; This will not be executed.
    endif
    if p
      ; Will not be executed, same as above.
    endif
    int x = p.x  ; Compiles, but illegal!
    if p
      x = p.x    ; This is safe
    endif

When an object reference can be null, as in the example above, you need
to test it first. Only use the object reference if it is non-null. If
you access a field or method using a null object reference, Ultra
Fractal will generate a run-time error and halt execution of the current
calculation.

Next: Member visibility

See Also
Classes
Memory management
