Parameters

Parameters are used to allow users to customize formulas without needing
to rewrite them. Parameters are used just like variables, with two
exceptions: you cannot write to them, and you must prefix them with the
@ character (so the compiler can determine they are parameters instead
of variables). Here is an example that uses a parameter:

    Mandelbrot {
    init:
      z = 0
    loop:
      z = z^@power + #pixel
    bailout:
      |z| < 4
    }

The parameter used here is @power. In the Formula tab, the user can now
enter a value for this parameter and view the Mandelbrot set of any
power using just one formula.

By default, the type of a parameter is complex. You can change that by
adding a param block to the default section of your formula and
providing the necessary settings. Using the param block, you can also
specify enumerated parameters. With enumerated parameters, the user does
not have to enter a numerical value, but rather chooses an item from a
drop-down list.

It is also possible to use user functions. These can be used just like
normal functions, with the exception that the user can choose the actual
function from a list of all available built-in functions. Here is an
example with a user function:

    Mandelbrot {
    init:
      z = 0
    loop:
      z = @myfunc(z) + #pixel
    bailout:
      |z| < 4
    }

Now, the user can use sqr, but also sin and cos and many other functions
with this formula. You can customize the behavior of the user function
using the func block in the default section.

Notes

- It is possible to write to parameters, although this is not
  recommended and can make your formulas run slower. It is provided for
  compatibility with old Fractint formulas.
- There are six predefined parameters: p1..p6, and four predefined
  functions: fn1..fn4. You do not need to use the @ prefix with these
  parameters and user functions. However, it is recommended to use your
  own names instead of these (with the @ prefix) to make your formulas
  easier to understand.
- The param and func blocks also provide settings for changing the
  caption, default, minimum and maximum values of parameters and user
  functions, as well as adding a small help text.
- Parameters are sorted alphabetically in the user interface, unless you
  provide a param block for each parameter. In this case, the parameters
  appear in the order of the param blocks in the formula file.
- In the user interface, you can also group parameters together by
  adding headings.
- For more information on using parameters with classes, see Plug-in
  parameters.

Next: Arrays

See Also
Providing help and hints
Writing direct coloring algorithms
