Plug-in parameters

Like formulas, classes can also have parameters and a title, which are
declared in the default section. This matters only if the class is used
by a plug-in parameter for a formula. Classes used by plug-in parameters
are called plug-ins.

When used as a plug-in, the class appears in the list of parameters in
the Layer Properties tool window, with the parameters for the class
grouped with the title of the class. (See Example 1 - Formula plug-ins
for a screen shot.)

Here is a simple example of a class that implements a simple bailout
condition for a Mandelbrot-like fractal formula. The bailout value is
exposed as a parameter.

    class Bailout {
    public:
      func Bailout()
        ; Empty constructor, see Writing plug-ins
      endfunc
      bool func hasBailedOut(const complex z)
        return |z| > @bailout
      endfunc
    default:
      title = "Simple Bailout"
      float param bailout
        caption = "Bailout value"
        default = 4
        min = 1
      endparam
    }

To be able to use this class as a plug-in and include its parameters in
the parameter list for a formula, declare a plug-in parameter in the
formula. A plug-in parameter is declared by a parameter block with a
class as the parameter type.

    MandelbrotTest {
    init:
      z = (0, 0)
      Bailout bo = new @bailoutParam
    loop:
      z = sqr(z) + #pixel
    bailout:
      !bo.hasBailedOut(z)
    default:
      Bailout param bailoutParam
        caption = "Bailout Test"
      endparam
    }

Notes

- Normally, you create an instance of a class with parameters using new
  and the class name. In this case, all parameters always remain at the
  default value. The plug-in parameter bailoutParam in the
  MandelbrotTest formula represents a variant of the Bailout class that
  has different parameter values, set by the user. To create an object
  that uses these user-set parameter values, use the new operator with
  the plug-in parameter as shown above.
- You can create more than one object from a single plug-in parameter,
  and you can have multiple plug-in parameters of the same class type,
  which each have their own independent set of parameters.
- Inside the class declaration for a plug-in, all parameters must be
  declared by a parameter block. (In contrast, formulas can have
  undeclared parameters for Fractint compatibility.)
- Optionally, a class used as a plug-in can also contain a rating
  setting in its default section.

Next: Writing plug-ins

See Also
Classes
Parameter blocks
Function blocks
Headings
