render setting

This setting is a bool setting that specifies if the formula is fully
compatible with rendering to disk. It defaults to true, because most
formulas are compatible. You only need to set it to false when a formula
is not directly compatible.

Formulas are not directly compatible with rendering to disk when they
perform most of their calculations in the global section. Such formulas,
like the Flame Fractals coloring algorithm, typically use a
two-dimensional array equal to the size of the screen to precalculate
the fractal.

The disk rendering engine divides images into horizontal strips to
reduce memory requirements when calculating large images. If most of the
fractal calculations are performed in the global section, these are
redone for each strip. Each strip allocates memory for the entire image,
and each strip calculates the entire image. Clearly, this is very
inefficient.

In formulas that perform most of their calculations in the global
section, you must set the render setting to false. This causes Ultra
Fractal to render layers that use such a formula in a special mode,
where it is rendered just once. This enables Ultra Fractal to render
flame fractals correctly.

Effects of setting the render setting to false are:

- Layers using the formula are not split into strips when rendering,
  which ensures that the global section is only executed once.
- Layers using the formula are not eligible for multi-threading or
  network calculations, since this also involves splitting them into
  parts.
- Selecting the Split into tiles option when rendering a fractal using
  the formula to disk results in a warning message, because this cannot
  be done efficiently.

Not all formulas that set up a two-dimension array equal to the size of
the image in the global section need to set the render setting to false.
Formulas that still perform most of their calculations in the per-pixel
sections such as the init, loop, and final sections, can benefit from
network rendering and multi-threading and will work reasonably well with
the default disk render behavior.

Example of a formula that uses the render setting:

    global:
      int pixels[#width + 1, #height + 1]
      ; Do all calculations here
    final:
      ; Look up pixel color or index value and assign to
      ; #pixel or #color
    default:
      title = "My Special Formula"
      render = false

See Also
Writing transformations
Writing fractal formulas
Writing coloring algorithms
Global sections
Calculation details
