Sections

Each entry in a formula file is divided into one or more sections. It
depends on the formula type which sections are supported and what they
can contain. This topic describes sections in general. For specific
information about a formula type, see Transformations, Fractal formulas,
and Coloring algorithms.

Here is an example of a fractal formula:

    MyMandelbrot {
    init:
      z = 0
    loop:
      z = sqr(z) + #pixel
    bailout:
      |z| < 4
    default:
      title = "My Mandelbrot"
    }

This formula contains four sections. There are three types of sections:

- Sections containing statements. These statements can be executed by
  Ultra Fractal; how and when this happens depends on the particular
  section. Each statement must be on a separate line, or they must be
  separated by commas. Examples of these sections are init and loop.
- Sections containing a boolean expression. There's only one section of
  this type, the bailout section.
- Sections containing settings related to the formula. Settings always
  have the form "setting = value". An example is the default section.

As you can see, sections are divided by labels. A label is just the name
of the section followed by a colon.

For compatibility reasons, it is sometimes allowed to omit the label in
some sections. For more information, see the formula-type specific
documentation.

You can break long statements and settings across several lines using
the backslash \ character. The backslash character must be the last
character on the line for this to work. Any spaces or tab characters on
the next line are removed, so if you want to add one or more spaces, you
must put them on the previous line (the line containing the backslash).
Example:

    default:
      title = "A very long title \
               for my \
               favorite formula"

This is equal to:

    default:
      title = "A very long title for my favorite formula"

Next: Expressions

See Also
Formula files and entries
Global sections
Member visibility
