Transformations
Note: You need Ultra Fractal Creative Edition or Extended Edition to use transformations.
Transformations globally transform and warp the shape of a fractal. You can combine various transformations to create
complex effects. Of course, you can also write your own transformations.
Transformations are managed in the Mapping tab of the Layer Properties tool window:

The Add button opens a modal browser to select a new transformation. The transformation is then added to the list.
The Delete button removes the selected transformations from the list.
The Reload button reloads the selected transformation from disk and recalculates the layer.
The Edit button opens the selected transformation in the formula editor.
The More button shows a menu with additional commands.
The Enable icon before a transformation quickly enables and disables the transformation.
The Solid Color swatch specifies the solid color for the selected transformations. The solid color can be used by a
transformation for special purposes. See Solid color.
The transformation parameters are additional parameters specific to the selected transformations. See Formula
parameters.
You can resize the transformations list by dragging the area just above the line that divides the Solid Color setting from
the transformation parameters. The Reload and Edit buttons hide themselves automatically when there is not enough
space. In this case, these commands can be found on the More menu.
Next: Working with transformations
See Also
Tutorial: Learning about transformations
Standard transformations
Fractal formulas
Coloring algorithms

156

Working with transformations
You work with transformations in the Mapping tab of the Layer Properties tool window. The Mapping tab shows a list with
the transformations used by the active layer.
Transformations are stored in transformation files (*.uxf). Each file can contain multiple transformations.
To add a transformation, click the Add button. This opens a modal browser that shows the transformation files on
your computer and the transformations that they contain. Double-click on a transformation to add it.
Hold down the Add button to open a menu with transformation presets, together with a Recent menu that provides
quick access to recently used transformations.
To remove the selected transformations, click the Delete button.
To rename the active transformation, click it again or press F2 (like in Windows Explorer).
To change the order in which transformations appear in the list, drag them up or down. See Multiple
transformations.
The Enable icon before each transformation enables and disables it. Use it to temporarily disable a transformation
so you can judge its effect, or adjust other transformations.
Some transformations contain additional help. To access it, click the More button, and then click Help from the
menu that opens. This menu also provided commands to copy and paste the settings and parameters for the
selected transformation, and to reset all parameters to the default values.
The bottom pane of the Mapping tab contains parameters specific to the selected transformations. These parameters work
the same as the parameters for fractal formulas. See Formula parameters.
Notes
You can select multiple transformations by holding down the Ctrl key while clicking a transformation. Hold down the
Shift key while clicking to select a range of transformations. This enables you to easily edit multiple transformations
together, like you can do with layers.
If multiple layers are selected, the list in the Mapping tab only shows those transformations that all selected layers
have in common.
Right-click inside the list of transformations to open a menu with frequently used commands.
Next: Multiple transformations
See Also
Tutorial: Learning about transformations
Transformations
Standard transformations
Public formulas

157

Multiple transformations
Ultra Fractal lets you combine multiple transformations to achieve more complex effects. With more than one
transformation, the order in which the transformations appear in the list in the Mapping tab of the Layer Properties tool
window is important.
You can view a transformation as if it transforms the image of the layer as produced by the fractal formula and the
coloring algorithms. (In fact, it works differently, but you can ignore that unless you are writing your own
transformations.)
The transformations are then processed from the bottom of the list to the top. So, if you have two transformations, the top
one works on the "image" produced by the second transformation.
Here is an example to illustrate this:

Original

Inverse

Lake

Two variations on the original image are shown. The first uses the Inverse transformation that turns an image "inside out".
The second variation uses the Lake transformation that mirrors the image horizontally and creates the illusion of water
ripples.
What happens if we combine the two transformations?

First Lake, then Inverse

First Inverse, then Lake

If we put Inverse above Lake, we get the first image. If we put Lake on top instead, the second image is produced. This
shows that a transformation works on the intermediate result produced by the transformations below it.
Notes
You can freely experiment with the order of the transformations by dragging them up or down in the list.
When you add a new transformation, it is always inserted above the selected transformation, so it works on the
intermediate image produced by that transformation.
Next: Solid color
See Also
Transformations
Working with transformations

158

Solid color
In the Mapping tab of the Layer Properties tool window, you can specify a solid color for each transformation. A
transformation can use this color for special purposes.
For example, a transformation that maps a fractal onto a plane in 3D space also needs to color the area that is above or
below the plane. This area is usually colored with the solid color.

This example shows a simple fractal mapped onto a sphere with the 3D Mapping transformation. The area outside the
sphere is given the solid color (in this case black).
To change the solid color, click on the Solid Color swatch in the Mapping tab. By default, it is set to black, but you can
choose any color. You can also change the opacity. By setting the opacity to 0, the solid color and thus the solid areas will
become transparent, so the lower layers will become visible.

In effect, the transformation not only transforms the shape of the fractal, but also generates a mask for the layer.
Some transformations are only intended to create masks, and do not transform the pixels at all. You should use them with
a transparent solid color. An example is the Clipping transformation.
Notes
If you make a solid color transparent, layer transparency will be enabled automatically. See Transparent layers.
The masks created with transformations always have sharp edges. For soft masking with more control over the
masking shapes, use layer masks instead. See Masks.
Next: Standard transformations
See Also
Transformations
Working with transformations

159

Standard transformations
Ultra Fractal comes with a set of standard transformations. They are located in the file Standard.uxf in the Formulas folder.
It contains the following transformations:
3D Mapping
Aspect Ratio
Clipping
Glass Hemisphere
Inverse
Kaleidoscope
Lake
Mirror
Plug-In Clipping
Plug-In Transformation
Ripples
Twist
All standard transformations are also implemented as transformation or clip shape plug-ins in Standard.ulb. This makes it
possible to use them with Plug-In Transformation or Plug-In Clipping, or in other formulas that accept transformation plugins. See About plug-ins for more information.
See Also
Standard fractal formulas
Standard coloring algorithms
Standard plug-ins
Transformations
Public formulas

160

3D Mapping
The 3D Mapping transformation maps a fractal onto a three-dimensional shape, such as a plane or
a sphere. It is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and as a transformation plug-in in
Standard.ulb.
Once this transformation is in effect, normal zooming and panning will just move the 3D shape
around with the fractal on it. If you want to zoom into the fractal as it is mapped onto the shape,
use the Fractal Center, Fractal Magnification, and Fractal Rotation parameters.
To use the rotation and translation parameters effectively, you need to understand the left-handed
3D coordinate system used by the transformation. Here, the X-axis points to the left, the Y-axis points upwards, and the
Z-axis points into the screen. So, if you use a positive Z-translation, the 3D shape will appear to move away, into the
screen.
The following parameters are available:
Shape

Selects the type of 3D shape that the fractal is mapped onto. In the plug-in version of 3D
Mapping, this is a plug-in parameter that lets you select any plug-in that implements a
mapping shape.

X Rotation
Y Rotation
Z Rotation

Rotates the 3D shape around the X, Y, or Z axis. To predict the direction of rotation, hold up
your left hand with your thumb pointing into the positive axis direction (for example, to the left
for X rotation). Your (curled) fingers now show the direction of positive rotation around that
axis.

X Translation
Y Translation
Z Translation

Moves the shape around in 3D space. You always need some positive Z translation to move the
shape "into" the screen, otherwise you will be "inside" the shape and it won't be visible. With
the plane shape, use a negative Y translation to look down upon it.

Fractal Center
Fractal Magnification
Fractal Rotation

Specifies the location of the fractal as it is mapped onto the shape. When adding the
transformation, the current coordinates will be used (remember to reset the location to get a
proper view of the 3D shape).
The easiest way to specify a location is to copy the coordinates from the Location tab of a
different fractal window that contains the same fractal formula without the 3D Mapping
transformation.

See Also
Tutorial: Learning about transformations
Standard transformations

161

Aspect Ratio
The Aspect Ratio transformation can be used to create fractals for media with non-square pixels.
You should add it to all layers of the fractal. It is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and
as a transformation plug-in in Standard.ulb.
The Aspect Ratio parameter specifies the aspect ratio (height / width) of the final media. The final
media is the computer screen or printed poster that will eventually display the fractal. If the value
of the parameter is equal to the height divided by the width of the fractal window, no stretching
occurs.
For example, suppose you would like to display a fractal on a 15" x 10" screen that has a resolution of 400 x 300 pixels.
Here, the pixels are wider than tall. You would set the width and height of the fractal window to 400 x 300 to obtain the
desired size. Then, set the Aspect Ratio parameter of this transformation to 0.6667 (10" / 15").
Most computer monitors and printers have square pixels. In this case, you do not need to use this transformation. If you
just want to stretch the fractal, use the Stretch parameter in the Location tab of the Layer Properties tool window instead.
See Also
Standard transformations

162

Clipping
The Clipping transformation cuts a geometric shape out of a fractal. The shape is filled with a solid
color. It can also be transparent, to make parts of the underlying layers visible.
Clipping is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and as a clip shape plug-in in
Standard.ulb. In plug-in form, it can be used together with Plug-In Clipping. In this case, it also
shows handles in the fractal window to show where the edges of the clipping shape are.
Both rectangular and circular shapes are available. You can choose to cut either the region inside or
outside the shape. This makes the Clipping transformation also useful for creating frames.
The following parameters are available:
Center

Specifies the coordinates of the center of the clipping shape. Use the eyedropper (right-click and
click Eyedropper) to select the center by clicking inside the fractal window.

Right Edge

Specifies the coordinates of the right edge of the clipping shape. Use the eyedropper to select this.

Top Edge

Specifies the coordinates of the top edge of the clipping shape. Use the eyedropper to select this.

Shape

Selects the type of shape to use. If you select circle or square, the Top Edge parameter is ignored.

Allow Rotation

If checked, the shape is allowed to rotate. In this case, the Right Edge parameter also defines the
rotation to use.

Region

Selects whether to cut the region outside the clipping shape, or inside the clipping shape. (This
parameter is not available in the Clipping plug-in.)

Screen-Relative

If checked, all coordinates are interpreted as relative to the screen. This makes it harder to enter
coordinates (because you can no longer use the eyedropper), but it preserves the location of the
clipping shape relative to the screen when zooming. (This parameter is not available in the Clipping
plug-in.)

See Also
Tutorial: Learning about transformations
Standard transformations

163

Glass Hemisphere
The Glass Hemisphere transformation displays the fractal as though it is viewed through a spherical
lens. It is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and as a transformation plug-in in
Standard.ulb.
The location, size, and apparent refractive index of the lens can be changed. The refractive index
adjusts the strength of the lens.
The following parameters are available:
Refractive index

Specifies the refractive index of the lens. You can use this to simulate various glass-like materials.
Larger values will increase the strength of the lens.

Width

Specifies the width of the lens in fractal coordinates.

Center

Specifies the coordinates of the center of the lens. Use the eyedropper (right-click and click
Eyedropper) to select the center by clicking inside the fractal window.

Use Screen Center If checked, the center of the screen is used instead of the Center parameter, so the lens is always
centered on the screen, even when zooming in.
See Also
Standard transformations

164

Inverse
The Inverse transformation turns a fractal inside out. The original center of the fractal is put
infinitely far away, and points that were far away end up near the center. Inverse is available as a
transformation in Standard.uxf and as a transformation plug-in in Standard.ulb.
This can change the shape of the fractal in unexpected ways. The example image shows the
Inverse transformation applied to a standard Mandelbrot set. (The inside areas of the Mandelbrot
set are colored gray.)
The following parameters are available:
Radius

Specifies the radius of the inversion circle. The transformation inverts all points around this circle.
Larger values will simply magnify the inverted fractal.

Center

Specifies the coordinates of the center of the inversion circle. This will drastically change the shape
and form of the fractal. Use the eyedropper (right-click and click Eyedropper) to select the center
by clicking inside the fractal window.

Use Screen Center If checked, the center of the screen is used instead of the Center parameter, so the inversion
circle is always centered on the screen. This can give unexpected effects when zooming in.
See Also
Standard transformations

165

Kaleidoscope
The Kaleidoscope transformation fills the screen with rotated copies of a small radial slice of the
fractal, creating a kaleidoscope effect. It is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and as a
transformation plug-in in Standard.ulb.
By tweaking the parameters, you can simulate many different kinds of symmetry. By default, the
slices are aligned and mirrored to make the edges match, but there are also other options that
produce sharp transitions.
Try experimenting with the Center and Rotation angle parameters to obtain good results. Some
sections of the fractal lend themselves much better to the kaleidoscope effect than others.
The following parameters are available:
Symmetry Order

Sets the symmetry order. This is the number of times the slice of the fractal is copied and rotated
to obtain the final image.

Symmetry Mode

Selects the symmetry mode to use. Only the reflective option is guaranteed to produce seamless
images. Use the slice only option to view the slice of the fractal that is used as a base for the
symmetry effect.

Center

Specifies the coordinates of the symmetry center. Together with the Rotation angle parameter,
this selects the slice of the fractal that is used. Try changing this to see the various effects that are
possible.
Use the eyedropper (right-click and click Eyedropper) to select the center by clicking inside the
fractal window.

Use Screen Center If checked, the center of the screen is used instead of the Center parameter, so the symmetry
center is always centered on the screen. This can give unexpected effects when zooming in.
Rotation angle

Rotates the fractal before determining the slice that will be used as a base for the symmetry
effect. This can drastically change the resulting image.

See Also
Mirror
Standard transformations

166

Lake
The Lake transformation mirrors the fractal in a rippled lake. The top part of the fractal is not
altered, but below the water level, everything is mirrored. It is available as a transformation in
Standard.uxf and as a transformation plug-in in Standard.ulb.
By changing the parameters, you can adjust the height and rotation of the water level, and change
the size and frequency of the waves.
The following parameters are available:
Water level

Selects the water level. Only the imaginary part of this parameter is used. Use the
eyedropper (right-click and click Eyedropper) to select the water level by clicking on a point
inside the fractal window.

Use screen center

If checked, the water level is always centered on the screen. In this case, the Water level
parameter is ignored.

Rotation angle

Rotates the water level. To rotate the fractal instead of the water, also enter the same value
in the Rotation angle parameter on the Location tab.

Use Location tab angle If checked, the rotation angle from the Location tab is used instead of the Rotation angle
parameter. This ensures that the water level is always horizontal.
Amplitude

Specifies the amplitude of the waves.

Frequency

Specifies the frequency of the waves.

See Also
Ripples
Standard transformations

167

Mirror
The Mirror transformation mirrors the fractal along an arbitrary axis. It can be useful for mirroring
effects with multiple layers. It is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and as a
transformation plug-in in Standard.ulb.
There are presets for a horizontal and a vertical reflection axis, but you can also specify any angle.
The center of the axis is configurable, too.
The following parameters are available:
Reflection Axis

Selects the reflection axis. The axis points into the mirroring direction, so it is perpendicular to
the imaginary mirror. Select arbitrary to specify any angle for the axis.

Reflection Angle

Specifies the rotation angle of the reflection axis, in degrees.

Center

Selects the center of the reflection axis. Use the eyedropper (right-click and click Eyedropper) to
select a point by inside the fractal window.

Use screen center

If checked, the reflection center is always centered on the screen. In this case, the Center
parameter is ignored.

See Also
Kaleidoscope
Standard transformations

168

Plug-In Clipping
The Plug-In Clipping transformation cuts a shape out of a fractal. The shape is determined by a clip
shape plug-in, and Plug-In Clipping allows any compatible clip shape plug-in to be selected.
By default, the Clipping plug-in from Standard.ulb is selected.
The following parameters are available:

Clipping Region

Selects whether to cut the region outside the clipping shape, or inside the clipping shape.

Screen-Relative
Coordinates

If checked, all coordinates are interpreted as relative to the screen. This makes it harder to enter
coordinates (because you can no longer use the eyedropper), but it preserves the location of the
clipping shape relative to the screen when zooming. The coordinates are interpreted with (0, 0) at
the lower left corner of the fractal window and (1, 1) at the upper right corner.

Clipping Shape

This is the clip shape plug-in parameter. You can select any plug-in that represents a clipping
shape.

Plug-In Clipping can also show handles around the edges of a clipping shape. The number and position of these handles
are determined by the selected clipping shape. By default, handles are shown in the fractal window, but not when
rendering or on previews. Under Handle options, this can be configured:
Show Handles

Sets whether handles are displayed at all.

Not on previews

If checked, handles are hidden on previews, for example in the browser or for explore or
eyedropper previews.
Not on renders
If checked, handles are hidden when rendering to disk.
Show Numbers
If checked, a number or label is displayed next to each handle if applicable.
Show Lines
If checked, lines are displayed if applicable.
Handle Size
Adjusts the apparent size of the handles.
Handle Thickness Adjusts the apparent thickness of the handles.

Note: Handles are shown by toggling the solid color of the transformation on and off, so you might not see them properly
if the solid color does not contrast with the fractal. Also, they do not work well in combination with the Guessing drawing
method.
See Also
Plug-ins
Standard transformations
Standard plug-ins

169

Plug-In Transformation
Plug-In Transformation is a skeleton transformation that lets a transformation plug-in do the actual
work. All transformations in Standard.uxf are also implemented as transformation plug-ins. You can
select any of these as the transformation plug-in to be used together with Plug-In Transformation.
The Transformation parameter sets the transformation plug-in to be used. By default, the Inverse
plug-in from Standard.ulb is selected.
See Also
Plug-ins
Standard transformations
Standard plug-ins

170

Ripples
The Ripples transformation adds a water ripple effect to the fractal. The center, strength, and
frequency of the ripples are adjustable. It is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and as a
transformation plug-in in Standard.ulb.
Interesting interference effects are obtained by adding multiple Ripple transformations to a fractal,
with different center and strength values.
The following parameters are available:
Ripple Center

Specifies the center of ripples. Use the eyedropper (right-click and click Eyedropper) to select
this by clicking on a point inside the fractal window.

Use Screen Center

If checked, the ripple center is always centered on the screen. In this case, the Ripple Center
parameter is ignored.

Ripple Strength

Specifies the strength of the ripples. Larger values give a larger distortion.

Ripple Frequency

Specifies the frequency of the ripples. Larger values will create more and smaller ripples.

Ripple Fade

Specifies how soon the ripples fade out. Larger values cause the ripples to fade out over a larger
distance (so more ripples are visible).

Ripple Type

Selects how the ripples distort the fractal. The default Forward and Back option gives the most
natural water-like effect, but the other options are also interesting.

See Also
Lake
Twist
Standard transformations

171

Twist
The Twist transformation adds a twisted spiral to the fractal. It distorts a small part of the fractal in
the form of a spiral, like a vortex. It is available as a transformation in Standard.uxf and as a
transformation plug-in in Standard.ulb.
The center, strength, and size of the vortex are adjustable. This transformation is often combined
with the Ripples transformation to obtain interference effects.
The following parameters are available:
Twist Center

Specifies the center of the twisted spiral. Use the eyedropper (right-click and click Eyedropper)
to select this by clicking on a point inside the fractal window.

Strength

Specifies the strength of the twist. Larger values create more strongly twisted spirals.

Decay Factor

Specifies how soon the spiral loses its strength. Larger values decrease the size of the spiral.

See Also
Lake
Standard transformations

172

Plug-ins
Since the first release of Ultra Fractal in 1998, the formulas written for it have become larger
and more complex. Even though many formulas are quite similar, they could not share any
common code, but had to be written as stand-alone formulas. For example, if you wanted to
add just one new feature to an existing formula written by someone else, you had to create
a new formula, duplicate all the code from the original formula, and only then add some new
things.
To improve this situation, Ultra Fractal 5 introduced the ability for formulas to re-use
common code via plug-ins. You can view a plug-in as a "black box" that adds functionality
to a formula. Via plug-in parameters, a formula enables you to select the actual plug-in that
performs an action for the formula.
The formula declares what kind of functionality it needs and you can select any compatible plug-in to actually implement it.
This makes it possible for formula authors to write a new plug-in to implement just the new feature that they want to add
to an existing formula. The formula doesn't have to be changed at all. You just select the new plug-in when you use the
formula.
For everyday users, plug-ins make it possible to combine existing elements in new ways without needing to do any
programming. For formula authors, plug-ins make it easier to write and manage complex formulas.
Next: Example 1 - Formula plug-ins
See Also
Fractal formulas
Writing formulas

173

Example 1 - Formula plug-ins
Tip: This example assumes that you are familiar with Ultra Fractal basics as explained in the tutorials.
As a first example of how plug-ins work in practice, let's take a look at some of the standard plug-ins that come with Ultra
Fractal.
First, use the browser to open the Default parameter set in Examples.upr.
Click the Browse button in the Formula tab of the Layer Properties tool window to select Plug-In Formula in
Standard.ufm.
Plug-In Formula is a "skeleton" formula that lets a plug-in implement the actual fractal formula behavior. It has just one
plug-in parameter called Fractal Formula which is set to the Mandelbrot plug-in by default:

The Mandelbrot plug-in has its own parameters like Starting point, which appear grouped with the plug-in parameter. Let's
select a different formula plug-in.
Click the Browse button for the Fractal Formula parameter to select a new plug-in. This opens the browser in
plug-in mode, so it shows only those plug-ins that are compatible with this plug-in parameter.
Locate the Newton plug-in in Standard.ulb and click OK.
Now, a Newton fractal appears instead of a Mandelbrot fractal. Formula authors could make a formula plug-in that works
with Plug-In Formula to create a different fractal, without having to modify Plug-In Formula itself. Of course, this doesn't
really do anything new, since you could also just write a new fractal formula. But it does make the formula behavior
available in a generic form.
Click the Browse button for the Fractal Formula parameter again, and this time, select the Slope plug-in.
Briefly go to the Outside tab of the Layer Properties and click the Browse button there to select the Lighting
coloring algorithm. Then go back to the Formula tab again.
The combination of the Slope formula plug-in and the Lighting coloring algorithm creates a 3D lighting effect. Previously,
there were three different Slope formulas for Mandelbrot, Julia, and Newton fractals (these are still in Standard.ufm). Each
of these formulas duplicates the code for the lighting effect; the only different code is the where the actual fractal formula
calculation is done. Adding a new fractal type could only be done by creating yet another variation of this formula.
However, now the Slope formula plug-in contains another plug-in parameter that enables you to select the internal fractal
formula. You can select any formula plug-in, just like with Plug-In Formula.
Click the Browse button for the Fractal Formula parameter inside the Slope plug-in (which currently is set to
Mandelbrot) and select Phoenix (Mandelbrot) instead.

Suddenly, we have a Slope formula that works with any fractal type. New fractal types can be added simply by writing
them as a formula plug-in, which makes them available for Plug-In Formula, Slope, or any other place where a fractal
formula can be inserted.
Next: Example 2 - Orbit trap plug-ins
See Also
Plug-ins
Fractal formulas
Writing formulas

174

Example 2 - Orbit trap plug-ins
Tip: This example assumes that you are familiar with Ultra Fractal basics as explained in the tutorials.
In the previous example, we saw how a formula plug-in can implement the behavior of an entire fractal formula. However,
it's also possible to use plug-ins in a more fine-grained way, exposing all aspects of a formula for maximum flexibility.
The Orbit Traps coloring plug-in is an example of this. The old Orbit Traps coloring algorithm (still available in
Standard.ucl) contained parameters such as trap shape, trap mode and trap coloring, each with a number of options. In
the new version, implemented as a coloring plug-in in Standard.ulb, these are now plug-in parameters. Every major option
is now handled by a separate plug-in. Let's have a look:
First, use the browser to open the Default parameter set in Examples.upr.
Click the Browse button in the Outside tab of the Layer Properties tool window to select Plug-In Coloring (Gradient)
in Standard.ucl.
Like Plug-In Formula, Plug-In Coloring (Gradient) is a skeleton coloring algorithm that lets a coloring plug-in do the work.
By default, it loads with the Smooth algorithm.
Click the Browse button for the Coloring Algorithm parameter to select the Orbit Traps plug-in in Standard.ulb.
As you can see, the Orbit Traps plug-in uses plug-in parameters for all major parameters. All trap shapes, for example, are
now implemented as separate plug-ins. Let's select a different trap shape.
Click the Browse button for the Trap Shape parameter to select the Gaussian Integer plug-in.

The old Gaussian Integer coloring algorithm in Standard.ucl actually is a variation on an orbit trap, just with a different
trap shape. It had limited options to color the trap shape, but now that it is available as a general trap shape plug-in, we
can combine it with any trap mode or trap coloring.
For example, you can select Angle to Origin 2 as the trap coloring to get an effect that you couldn't create with the
original Gaussian Integer coloring algorithm.
When formula authors write new trap shapes, trap modes or trap colorings and make them available in plug-in library files
via the public formula library, you can just drop them into this standard Orbit Traps plug-in to use them.
Next: Working with plug-ins
See Also
Plug-ins
Coloring algorithms
Writing formulas

175

Working with plug-ins
Plug-ins are commonly stored in plug-in library files with an .ulb extension. Like all formula files, you can examine and
organize plug-in library files with the browser. Make sure all files are visible, or set the file type to Plug-Ins.
Usually though, you'll work with plug-ins via plug-in parameters in the formula parameters list.
Click the Browse button for a plug-in parameter to select a different plug-in. A modal browser window opens,
which shows only those plug-ins that are compatible with the current parameter.
Tip: In the browser window, click the Find Entries button and leave all fields blank to get a list of all compatible
plug-ins in the formula library.
Hold down the Browse button for a menu with other options:

Click Recent to open a menu with a list of recently used plug-ins, so you can quickly select one of these.
Click Copy to copy the currently selected plug-in with all its sub-parameters to the Clipboard.
Click Paste to copy the plug-in information on the Clipboard to the plug-in parameter. The plug-in parameter must
be compatible with the plug-in parameter that you copied the plug-in information from, otherwise an error message
is shown.
Click Reset Plug-In to select the default plug-in for the plug-in parameter.
Click Reset Parameters to reset the sub-parameters for the currently selected plug-in to their default values. The
plug-in itself stays the same.
Click Edit to open the class declaration for the plug-in in the formula editor.
Next: Standard plug-ins
See Also
Plug-ins
Working with formulas
Writing formulas

176

Standard plug-ins
All standard transformations, fractal formulas and coloring algorithms that come with Ultra Fractal are also available as
plug-ins in the Standard.ulb file. This file is installed with the other standard formula files in the main formula folder. For
more information, see the documentation for the standard formulas:
Standard transformations
Standard fractal formulas
Standard coloring algorithms
For tips on how to use the standard plug-ins, see the plug-in usage examples.
Generally, to get as much formulas and plug-ins working together as possible, it is necessary for them to share the
definition for common types of plug-ins. These shared definitions are in the file common.ulb. By adhering to these
definitions, different formulas and plug-ins from different formula authors can easily work with each other. The
common.ulb file is installed in the folder for public formulas so it can be updated automatically via the online formula
database when necessary.
The common.ulb file is intended mainly for formula authors. For everyday users, it does contain some useful plug-ins:
Clip Shape Merge allows a single clip shape parameter to accept multiple clip shapes. See Plug-In Clipping.
Image Trap allows an image to be used as a color trap for the Direct Orbit Traps coloring plug-in.
Transform Merge allows a single transformation parameter to accept multiple transformations. See Plug-In
Transformation.
Trap Shape Block and Trap Shape Merge allows a single trap shape parameter to accept multiple trap shapes,
and to transform trap shapes. See also Example 2 - Orbit trap plug-ins.
For formula authors, the common.ulb file is invaluable and almost any plug-in you write should be based on one of the
base classes found here. If you think modifications or new base classes are needed, please e-mail to info@ultrafractal.com
or the UF programmers mailing list with your suggestion.
See Also
About plug-ins
Writing formulas

177


Writing transformations
Transformations are put in transformation files with the .uxf extension. They can have the following sections, in this order:
global
transform
default
If a transformation does not start with a label, it is assumed to start with the transform section. The optional setting
within parentheses after the entry identifier is ignored.
The global section is executed only once per image and can be used to fill look-up tables and initialize read-only variables.
See Global sections.
The transform section contains one or more statements. The purpose of these statements is to take the predefined
symbol #pixel, which contains the coordinates of the pixel currently being calculated, transform it and put the result back
in #pixel. They can also set the predefined boolean symbol #solid to true to give the pixel a solid color instead of
calculating it. In this case, no further calculations are done for the pixel. The solid color is adjustable on the Mapping tab of
the Layer Properties tool window.
The default section can contain the following settings:
helpfile
helptopic
precision
rating
render
title
It can also contain one or more parameter blocks.
Next: Writing fractal formulas
See Also
Writing formulas
Transformations

262


Global sections
Sometimes, initializing variables of a formula can require a large number of calculations. Since you would normally
initialize variables in the init section of a fractal formula or a coloring algorithm (or the transform section of a
transformation), these calculations are performed again and again for every pixel.
Often, they only depend on parameter settings, and therefore the results are the same for every pixel. To avoid doing
many repeated calculations, you can move them to the global section. This is a special section at the start of a formula
that is executed once per image.
Use the global section to perform per-image calculations and store the results in variables that can be read in other
sections. Variables declared here are treated as read-only in other sections, so you cannot use this to share variables
across pixels (that would not work reliably).
In the following example, the global section is used to pre-calculate an array of random values that is the same for every
pixel. These random values are subsequently used to disturb a standard Mandelbrot set.

MandelbrotModified {
global:
float values[#maxiter]
int i = 0
int seed = 12345678
while i < 100
seed = random(seed)
values[i] = seed / #randomrange
i = i + 1
endwhile
init:
z = (0,0)
int iter = 0 ; "i" is already taken
loop:
z = sqr(z) + #pixel + values[iter]
iter = iter + 1
bailout:
|z| 4
}
Notes
Global sections are often combined with arrays to compute look-up tables that can speed up the formula
tremendously.
You can even declare an array equal to the size of the image (with the #width and #height predefined symbols) and
calculate the entire fractal in the global section of a coloring algorithm. The final section is then used only to return
colors or index values from this array. This enables you to implement fractal types like IFS and flame fractals that
are not natively supported by Ultra Fractal. This technique does have some limitations: it can require a fair amount
of memory and the progress of the calculation is not reported. It is very slow and memory-intensive with rendering
to disk, especially with anti-aliasing, and it does not work well with network calculations either. See also the render
setting.
Next: Image parameters
See Also
Arrays
Sections

267

Execution sequence
To help you understand the way Ultra Fractal executes the various sections in all formula types, here is an overview of the
execution sequence per pixel, written in pseudo-code similar to the formula language.
Before calculating the image, the global sections are executed:

for each transformation
execute global section of transformation
execute global section of fractal formula
execute global section of inside coloring algorithm
execute global section of outside coloring algorithm
Then, for each pixel, the following calculations are performed:

for each transformation
#solid = false
execute transform section of transformation
if #solid == true
stop and give pixel the solid mapping color
endfor
execute init section of fractal formula
execute init section of inside coloring algorithm (if it exists)
execute init section of outside coloring algorithm (if it exists)
int iter = 0
repeat
execute loop section of fractal formula
bool b = the expression in the bailout section of the fractal formula
if b == true
; not yet bailed out
execute loop section of inside coloring algorithm (if it exists)
execute loop section of outside coloring algorithm (if it exists)
endif
iter = iter + 1
until (b == false) || (iter == #maxiter)
#numiter = iter
if #numiter == #maxiter
; pixel is inside
execute final section of the inside coloring algorithm
else
; pixel is outside
execute final section of the outside coloring algorithm
endif
color the pixel
Next: Invalid operations
See Also
Writing transformations
Writing fractal formulas
Writing coloring algorithms
Global sections

278

