Writing coloring algorithms

Coloring algorithms are put in coloring algorithm files with the .ucl
extension. They can have the following sections, in this order:

- global
- init
- loop
- final
- default

If a coloring algorithm does not start with a label, it is assumed to
start with the final section (in that case, the init and loop sections
are not allowed).

The optional setting within parentheses after the entry identifier
specifies whether the coloring algorithm can be used for inside
coloring, outside coloring, or both. The possible values are:

  --------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  INSIDE    The coloring algorithm is only intended for coloring the inside of a fractal.
  OUTSIDE   The coloring algorithm is only intended for coloring the outside of a fractal.
  --------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If the setting is omitted, or has another value, the coloring algorithm
is supposed to be useful for both inside and outside coloring. See also
Inside and outside.

The global section is executed only once per image and can be used to
fill look-up tables and initialize read-only variables. See Global
sections.

The init section is executed only once per pixel, and is useful for
initializing variables.

The loop section is executed once per iteration, right after the loop
section of the fractal formula has been executed. It can read the
current value of #z and perform some calculations on it.

The final section is executed afterwards to determine the actual index
into the gradient (this index is further transformed by the various
settings on the Inside or Outside tabs). The index is a float value and
should be written to the predefined symbol #index. If the settings on
the Inside or Outside tab are set to their default values (Density = 1,
Transfer = Normal and Offset = 0), the entire gradient range corresponds
to the range 0..1 of the index value.

To create a direct coloring algorithm, use the predefined symbol #color
instead of #index.

It is also possible to set the predefined symbol #solid to true: this
gives the pixel the solid color set in the Inside or Outside tab of the
Layer Properties tool window.

The default section can contain the following settings:

- helpfile
- helptopic
- precision
- rating
- render
- title

It can also contain one or more parameter blocks.

Next: Writing direct coloring algorithms

See Also
Writing formulas
Coloring algorithms
