Writing plug-ins

Plug-in parameters make it easy to create different formulas with common
features. What's even better is that you can write new plug-ins that can
be used with the plug-in parameters in existing formulas.

If you load the MandelbrotTest example in Ultra Fractal, a Browse button
is visible next to the name of the default plug-in in the list of
parameters. This button enables the user to select a different plug-in,
as long as it descends from the Bailout class. (See Example 1 - Formula
plug-ins for an example.)

Let's write a new plug-in descending from the Bailout class that
implements more bailout options:

    class ExtendedBailout(Test.ufm:Bailout) {
    public:
      bool func hasBailedOut(const complex z)
        return (@test == "mod" && |z| > @bailout) ||      \
          (@test == "real" && sqr(real(z)) > @bailout) || \
          (@test == "imag" && sqr(imag(z)) > @bailout)
      endfunc
    default:
      title = "Extended Bailout"
      int param test
        caption = "Bailout Test"
        default = 0
        enum = "mod" "real" "imag"
      endparam
    }

If you put this code in a plug-in library file (say Test.ulb), you can
select the new plug-in by clicking on the Browse button next to the
Bailout plug-in parameter. The MandelbrotTest formula will now use the
bailout code from the ExtendedBailout class. As you can see, this system
enables you to add new features to a formula even after it has been
published, without having to modify the formula itself!

- The descendant class must be declared in a plug-in library file with
  the .ulb file extension so the browser can find it. Therefore, the
  file name of the ancestor needs to be specified as well. The example
  code above assumes that both MandelbrotTest and the Bailout class are
  declared in a file called Test.ufm. See also Importing classes.
- The ExtendedBailout class overrides the hasBailedOut method to change
  its behavior. Note that it introduces a new parameter called test. The
  bailout parameter is inherited from the Bailout base class.
- If you want your plug-in to appear in the browser when selecting a
  value for the plug-in parameter, make sure it has a title. Classes
  without a title are not treated as plug-ins and they are not visible
  in the browser. (This is useful for abstract base classes, as
  explained in the next paragraph.)
- In this example, the Bailout base class already has a default behavior
  and a parameter. In practice, it might be better to have an abstract
  base class that only declares the methods that form the public
  interface for the class. Do not include a title for the abstract base
  class (the browser will only show classes with a title as available
  plug-ins). In the plug-in parameter declaration for the formula that
  uses an abstract class, you can then use the default setting to select
  a descendant of the base class as the default plug-in. This descendant
  should be placed in a plug-in library file. In this way, the abstract
  base class is never used on its own, just as a base class.
- A descendant can also override parameters from its ancestor by
  including a parameter block for an inherited parameter. This parameter
  block completely replaces all previous settings for the parameter.
  With this, you can for example change the default value of a
  parameter, or hide it by setting visible to false. The type of the
  parameter must remain the same.
- In case you do not want to provide the option to the user to select a
  different plug-in for a plug-in parameter, set the selectable setting
  of the plug-in parameter to false. This completely removes the plug-in
  title and the Browse button, and causes the parameters of the plug-in
  to be listed between the normal formula parameters.
- The base class must have a constructor (possibly empty), otherwise the
  constructor of the descendant class will never be called. The compiler
  will generate a warning if you use a base class without a constructor
  for a plug-in parameter, and the selectable setting is not false.
- You can determine the currently selected class of a plug-in parameter
  by comparing the plug-in parameter to the class directly with the ==
  operator or != operator. This allows you to show or enable other
  parameters depending on the currently selected plug-in . (You can also
  determine the selected plug-in with a cast, but that requires the
  creation of an instance of the plug-in, something you cannot do in
  visible or enabled settings.)
- Of course, plug-ins can in turn also contain plug-in parameters.

Next: Parameter forwards

See Also
Classes
Plug-in parameters
Inheritance
Overriding
